# Project: Cloud Data Warehous (AWS Redshift)

**Introduction**<br>
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

**Project Description**<br>
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

## Input data

Data is collected for song metadata and user activities, using JSON files. The data  two datasets that reside in AWS S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

- Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
- Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

Log data json path: `s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json`

### Song dataset format

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset:

- `song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json`
- `song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```json
{
  "num_songs": 1,
  "artist_id": "ARGSJW91187B9B1D6B",
  "artist_latitude": 35.21962,
  "artist_longitude": -80.01955,
  "artist_location": "North Carolina",
  "artist_name": "JennyAnyKind",
  "song_id": "SOQHXMF12AB0182363",
  "title": "Young Boy Blues",
  "duration": 218.77506,
  "year": 0
}
```

### Log dataset format

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json`
`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`

A single entry has the following structure:

```json
{
  "artist": "Survivor",
  "auth": "Logged In",
  "firstName": "Jayden",
  "gender": "M",
  "itemInSession": 0,
  "lastName": "Fox",
  "length": 245.36771,
  "level": "free",
  "location": "New Orleans-Metairie, LA",
  "method": "PUT",
  "page": "NextSong",
  "registration": 1541033612796,
  "sessionId": 100,
  "song": "Eye Of The Tiger",
  "status": 200,
  "ts": 1541110994796,
  "userAgent": "\"Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; WOW64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/36.0.1985.143 Safari/537.36\"",
  "userId": "101"
}
```

(Note: data is not included in this repository.)

## Schema

Final fact and dimension tables should be following a star schema with an analytics focus. It is defined as follows:

### Fact Table

**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
*songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*

### Dimension Tables

**users** - users in the app
*user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*

**songs** - songs in music database
*song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*

**artists** - artists in music database
*artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude*

**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
*start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday*

## Build [to be re-defined, WIP]

This project runs with **Python 3.6** or higher ...

[COMPLETE THIS]

## Run [to be re-defined, WIP]

_Script to create the database tables or to reset the database:

``` sh
./create_tables.py
```

ETL pipeline to populate data into the tables:

``` sh
./etl.py
```

One way to verify the data is using the provided `test.ipynb` jupyter notebook in the development folder:

``` sh
./z_dev_notebooks/jupyter notebook_
```
