# Project: Data Lake with PySpark (AWS EMR, S3)

## Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.


This project will extract data from S3, transform it using Spark and store data back into a S3 data lake using the parquet format._

After setting up an AWS EMR cluster, the task is building an ETL pipeline that:

- extracts the JSON data from S3
- processed them using Spark, and
- loads them back to S3 as a set of dimensional analytics tables.

This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## Input data

Data is collected for song metadata and user activities, using JSON files. The data  two datasets that reside in AWS S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

- Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
- Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

Log data json path: `s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json`

### Song dataset format

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset:

- `song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json`
- `song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```json
{
  "num_songs": 1,
  "artist_id": "ARGSJW91187B9B1D6B",
  "artist_latitude": 35.21962,
  "artist_longitude": -80.01955,
  "artist_location": "North Carolina",
  "artist_name": "JennyAnyKind",
  "song_id": "SOQHXMF12AB0182363",
  "title": "Young Boy Blues",
  "duration": 218.77506,
  "year": 0
}
```

### Log dataset format

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json`
`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`

A single entry has the following structure:

```json
{
  "artist": "Survivor",
  "auth": "Logged In",
  "firstName": "Jayden",
  "gender": "M",
  "itemInSession": 0,
  "lastName": "Fox",
  "length": 245.36771,
  "level": "free",
  "location": "New Orleans-Metairie, LA",
  "method": "PUT",
  "page": "NextSong",
  "registration": 1541033612796,
  "sessionId": 100,
  "song": "Eye Of The Tiger",
  "status": 200,
  "ts": 1541110994796,
  "userAgent": "\"Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; WOW64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/36.0.1985.143 Safari/537.36\"",
  "userId": "101"
}
```

(Note: data is not included in this repository.)

## Schema --- UPDATE HERE --- 


Final fact and dimension tables should be following a star schema with an analytics focus. It is defined as follows:

### Fact Table

**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
*songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*

### Dimension Tables

**users** - users in the app
*user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*

**songs** - songs in music database
*song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*

**artists** - artists in music database
*artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude*

**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
*start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday*

## Build [to be re-defined, WIP]

This project runs with **Python 3.6** or higher on an **AWS Redshift Cluster**.

The project python dependencies can be installed with help of the envirment.yml (conda) or requirements.txt (pip).

## Config

Copy `dwh.cfg.example` to `dwh.cfg`, and fill the settings for:

- Cluster Creation on `[DWH]` and `[AWS]`
- Cluster Connection on `[CLUSTER]`
- Your ARN to provide S3 access from Redshift on `[IAM_ROLE]`

## Run

Script to create the database tables or to reset the database:

``` sh
./create_tables.py
```

ETL pipeline to populate data into the tables:

``` sh
./etl.py
```

(For creating and deleting the cluster before beginning and after finishing the project the `AWS_create_Redshift_Cluster.ipynb` was used.)
